LONDON, May 23 (Reuters) - The world's 'carbon majors' in the energy, utilities and mining sectors face the biggest share price hit when climate-related lawsuits are filed against them and need to consider it a financial risk, a study on Tuesday showed.
The paper by the London School of Economics' Grantham Research Institute, titled 'Impacts of climate litigation on firm value', studied 108 cases against U.S. and European-listed companies filed between 2005 and 2021.
While the range of cases is broad, the researchers said the findings show a causal link between litigation and stock prices, with a filing or unfavourable court ruling reducing a firm's value by an average 0.41%, relative to expected values.
The largest impact was seen in cases filed against the largest emitters in the energy-intensive energy, mining and utilities sectors, where a firm's value fell 0.57% following a filing and by 1.5% after an unfavourable judgement.
Larger reactions were seen in 'novel' cases, where a new legal argument was being pursued, or in a jurisdiction that had not previously seen a case. Non-carbon majors saw no statistically significant impact, the study said.
"The findings suggest that lenders, financial regulators and governments should consider climate litigation risk as a relevant financial risk in a warmer future," the study said.
Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.
Exxon Mobil Corp and two partners earned $5.8 billion last year from offshore oil production in Guyana, according to audited results filed in an appeal of a court ruling that found them in breach of insurance obligations.
Reuters, the news and media division of Thomson Reuters, is the world’s largest multimedia news provider, reaching billions of people worldwide every day. Reuters provides business, financial, national and international news to professionals via desktop terminals, the world's media organizations, industry events and directly to consumers.
Build the strongest argument relying on authoritative content, attorney-editor expertise, and industry defining technology.
The most comprehensive solution to manage all your complex and ever-expanding tax and compliance needs.
The industry leader for online information for tax, accounting and finance professionals.
 Access unmatched financial data, news and content in a highly-customised workflow experience on desktop, web and mobile.
 Browse an unrivalled portfolio of real-time and historical market data and insights from worldwide sources and experts.
Screen for heightened risk individual and entities globally to help uncover hidden risks in business relationships and human networks.
All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a complete list of exchanges and delays.
© 2023 Reuters. All rights reserved
