Gulab jamuns (traditional Indian sweet) are on display for sale at a sweets shop in Mumbai, India, April 20, 2018. REUTERS/Francis Mascarenhas Acquire Licensing Rights
NEW DELHI, June 9 (Reuters) - Some 11% of Indians are diabetic, a government study found, adding that diabetes, hypertension and obesity are much more common in India than previously estimated.
The study of more than 113,000 people also found that around 15% of Indians were pre-diabetic and around 35% have hypertension. It was conducted between October 2008 and December 2020 across 31 Indian states and territories.
"It is quite evident from the study results that India has a substantial population at risk of cardiovascular disease and other long-term organ complications," R.S. Dhaliwal, head of the non-communicable diseases division at the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), said in a statement.
ICMR, which funded the study, estimates that India - the world's most populous country - has 101 million people with diabetes.
That is 36% more than a 2021 estimate of 74.2 million people by the International Diabetes Federation.
The Indian government says unhealthy diets, lack of physical activity as well as the harmful use of alcohol and tobacco are factors behind the rise in cases of diabetes.
India's health secretary said last month that the "lifestyle of a large section of the population has become more sedentary than before" and that the burden of metabolic diseases was growing.
The U.S. National Clinical Care Commission has also estimated that about 11% of the U.S. population has diabetes.
Reporting by Krishna N. Das; Editing by Edwina Gibbs
Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.
Norway believes Israel may have broken international law in its bombardment of Gaza that has levelled neighbourhoods and killed thousands of Palestinians, its foreign minister said on Tuesday.
Reuters, the news and media division of Thomson Reuters, is the world’s largest multimedia news provider, reaching billions of people worldwide every day. Reuters provides business, financial, national and international news to professionals via desktop terminals, the world's media organizations, industry events and directly to consumers.
Build the strongest argument relying on authoritative content, attorney-editor expertise, and industry defining technology.
The most comprehensive solution to manage all your complex and ever-expanding tax and compliance needs.
The industry leader for online information for tax, accounting and finance professionals.
 Access unmatched financial data, news and content in a highly-customised workflow experience on desktop, web and mobile.
 Browse an unrivalled portfolio of real-time and historical market data and insights from worldwide sources and experts.
Screen for heightened risk individual and entities globally to help uncover hidden risks in business relationships and human networks.
All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a complete list of exchanges and delays.
© 2023 Reuters. All rights reserved
