AREQUIPA, Peru, Oct 24 (Reuters) - The reconstructed head and torso of a young girl likely sacrificed to appease Incan gods was unveiled in Peru on Tuesday, with three-dimensional scans of her mummy helping produce the lifelike recreation more than 500 years after her death.
Scientists from both Peru and Poland used digital scans of her mostly well-preserved mummy, which was found in 1995 inside an Inca-era funerary bundle near the summit of the Ampato volcano outside Arequipa, in Peru's south.
Ruling over a massive swath of western South America along the Pacific coast and Andean highlands, the Inca saw their rich and powerful empire fall to Spanish invaders in 1532.
But some time before then, the girl was sacrificed by a blow to the head, possibly in a ritual ceremony that sought divine relief from natural disasters, according to the scientists.
[1/5]The face, reconstructed using three-dimensional technology, of a girl who was sacrificed over 500 years ago and whose frozen body was discovered in 1995, is pictured at the Catholic University of Santa Maria, in Arequipa, Peru October 24, 2023. REUTERS/Ros Postigo Acquire Licensing Rights
Dubbed the Lady of Ampato, or simply Juanita, she was believed to be either 14 or 15 years old.
The reconstruction now on display at the Catholic University of Santa Maria in Arequipa shows her mouth slightly open and dark, piercing eyes gazing into the distance. It includes colorful attire, head covering and adornments, similarly based on the scans of the mummy.
"It's been done in a magnificent way," said archaeologist Johan Reinhard, who was part of the team that found the mummy, adding that the reconstruction was especially striking since her face had been exposed to the elements and as a result was not well preserved.
"Seeing her face like when she was alive, it's a different experience because it seems so real," he said.
Reporting by Pocho Torres and Carlos Valdez; Writing by David Alire Garcia; Editing by Raju Gopalakrishnan
Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.
On May 4, 2022, NASA's InSight lander detected the largest quake yet recorded on Mars, one with a 4.7 magnitude - fairly modest by Earth standards but strong for our planetary neighbor.
Reuters, the news and media division of Thomson Reuters, is the world’s largest multimedia news provider, reaching billions of people worldwide every day. Reuters provides business, financial, national and international news to professionals via desktop terminals, the world's media organizations, industry events and directly to consumers.
Build the strongest argument relying on authoritative content, attorney-editor expertise, and industry defining technology.
The most comprehensive solution to manage all your complex and ever-expanding tax and compliance needs.
The industry leader for online information for tax, accounting and finance professionals.
 Access unmatched financial data, news and content in a highly-customised workflow experience on desktop, web and mobile.
 Browse an unrivalled portfolio of real-time and historical market data and insights from worldwide sources and experts.
Screen for heightened risk individual and entities globally to help uncover hidden risks in business relationships and human networks.
All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a complete list of exchanges and delays.
© 2023 Reuters. All rights reserved
