Massive en español
Noticias de ciencia
COVID-19
The facts about COVID-19, straight from scientists
Butt Month
The science of butts, poop, and intestines
Surviving the Anthropocene
Adapting to endure humanity's impact on the world
Science Heroes
Women in STEM you may not have heard of
Mind Control
Dispatches from the frontiers of neuroscience
Food for Thought
Making agriculture safe, healthy, and sustainable
Breakthroughs
Interviews with cutting-edge scientists
David Clode via Unsplash
Changing the way we think about protein may have a big impact on the environment

Shira Gordon


Entomology

Today we have more culinary options, and the ability to obtain more information to inform our diet choices, than ever before. Social media, in particular, has recently brought attention to non-Western cuisine—like eating bugs.
Although many cultures have long considered insects tasty, entomophagy—eating insects—has only recently caught on in North America and Europe. But eating insects can be a healthy choice, for both the environment and for humans. Compared gram to gram with conventional beef, raising insect protein requires 8 to 14 times less land, 5 times less water, and emits 6 to 13 times less greenhouse gasses. This is because insects have an incredible ability to convert their food into edible body mass. Because they're cold-blooded, they don't waste energy maintaining their body temperature. Since the whole insect is consumed, unlike animals, eating insects is also more efficient. A U.N. Report from 2013 suggests eating insects might be a critical way to help meet the almost doubled food demand predicted by the year 2050.
But insects are also a source of high quality protein, containing many essential amino acids required for human nutrition. They're also a good source of fatty acids, minerals—like iron, zinc, sodium, potassium, selenium, and copper—and vitamins, such as the B vitamins. Finally, insects contain dietary fiber, derived mostly from the chitin that makes up their exoskeleton. (Fiber is something most other animal products don't offer.) 
Shira Gordon
They might have health benefits beyond their mere nutritional content, too. Dr. Valerie Stull, a research scientist at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, recently published a study comparing the gut microbiota of people before and after incorporating whole insect powder into their diets. The participants in the double-blind trial group received a prepared breakfast every day, including a pumpkin muffin and a protein shake, with 25 grams of cricket powder incorporated. The control group was also given foods with a similar macro- and micronutrient makeup, but without the added cricket powder. After two weeks, Dr. Stull assessed the changes in the subjects’ microbial gut content.
Eating insect powder, even for a short period of time, increased the abundance of Bifidobacterium animalis, which is considered a helpful probiotic. This bacteria can improve gastrointestinal functions and protect against diarrhea. The study suggests that insect powder itself can act as a prebiotic, meaning it's food for other beneficial bacteria that grow within the healthy human gut. 
But as Dr. Stull says, “No one has really looked at the direct impacts of consuming insects on health, particularly how it might affect our gut microbiome.” She thinks that insect eating has “endless potential,” especially for people who are protein deficient.
Shira Gordon
 Some cultures across the globe already regularly eat insects—approximately two billion people in over 130 countries. But Western society has been slow to embrace the idea. Some of these cuisine differences may stem from geography, according to Dr. Julie Lesnik, an assistant professor of anthropology at Wayne State University. She explains that centuries ago, when the world was much colder, insects were not available year-round in much of the northern hemisphere. So when Europeans started sailing the world, they did not consider eating insects, as insects were only present when other food went bad or as feed for animals, not as source of their own food. When they arrived in the Americas and encountered people that considered insects a common staple of their diet, the Europeans couldn't understand it. 
“Explorers were shocked to see indigenous peoples in more tropical areas consume insects and immediately used this to judge them as animal-like,” says Lesnik. “If we look to the deep cultural history in Europe, insects were never a widely used resource.” Lesnik has recently published a book, Edible Insects and Human Evolution, where she explores the role of insects as part of the diet of early humans.
But today, insect protein represents a budding food industry, including in gourmet meals. In 2015, the commercial potential in the United States was estimated at $33 million dollars. Joseph Yoon, for example, a gourmet chef who has a culinary insect company, caters five-course insect-themed meals, and is planning events around the United States in 2019. (To see a gourmet meal made from insects, check out this video filmed at the biannual meeting of the North American Coalition for Insect Agriculture in 2018).
Shira Gordon
Companies across North America have started raising FDA-approved insects to fill the rising demand. Popular products include an insect powder, similar to the one used in Dr. Stull’s study, protein bars, whole insect snacks, and even protein chips. (Speaking from personal experience, “Chirps Chips” are tasty.) There are now many companies in the field and places to purchase them are proliferating. It may still seem a strange concept, but insect cuisine is likely coming soon to plates near you. 
Recent scientific evidence shows that conservation programs could harm monarch populations if done at large scales
Lila Westreich, University of Washington

August 13, 2021

Ashley Juavinett, UC San Diego

August 8, 2021

Elyse DeFranco

March 21, 2021

Hanusia Higgins, University of Vermont

March 12, 2021

Sruthi Sanjeev Balakrishnan, National Centre for Biological Sciences

January 26, 2021

Hannah Norman, Kaiser Health News

April 2, 2021

Joris Wijnker, Utrecht University
Paul Overgaauw, Utrecht University

March 27, 2021

Francesco Zangari, University of Toronto

March 7, 2021

Michele Cohen Marill, Kaiser Health News

February 16, 2021

That's not how your nose works
Carl Philpott, University of East Anglia

October 5, 2020

JoNel Aleccia

February 20, 2020

Thiago Arzua, Medical College of Wisconsin

May 2, 2021

Mackenzie Thornbury, University of Montreal

March 1, 2021

Lila Westreich, University of Washington

September 10, 2021

Rita Ponce, Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal

July 11, 2021

Hayden Waller, Cornell University

June 30, 2021

Eliza Middleton, University of Sydney
Linda Evans, Macquarie University

May 15, 2021

Lauren Sara McKee, KTH Royal Institute of Technology

November 4, 2019

You've got great taste
You've got an appetite for amazing science stories—we love cooking them up. Subscribe to hear when we publish new stories you'll really dig into.
We're a community of scientists telling fascinating, true stories about the science that's happening now.
© 2017 – 2020 Massive Science Inc.
